---
address: England, United Kingdom
bibliography:
- cv/references.bib
---

2025-02-25 Mosab Ibrahim Resume

::: cventries
**Production Engineer** Meta / Facebook London, United Kingdom Mar
2022 - Aug 2024

::: cvitems
Member of the Backup and Restore team, building services and tooling
ensuring the ability to recover data from backups for both the MySQL and
ZippyDB (main key/value store at Meta) reliably, efficiently and
correctly, serving as the defence line against data loss and corruption
across all our family of services and apps (Facebook, Messenger,
Instagram, and WhatsApp, serving 3.7 Billion users). MySQL at Meta is
one of the largest -if not the largest- installations on the planet.

Focused on the recovery area, leading and implementing projects ensuring
and unblocking our ability to restore huge amounts of data in disaster
scenarios, and projects that reduce RTO (Restore Time Objective) for the
datastores we support.

Participated in and influence roadmapping sessions and team
prioritisation efforts, building shared consensus, listening to
feedback, and deriving insights from production issues, insights, and
toil to ensure we are always working on the most important projects.

Participated in oncall rotation, leading investigations into incidents
related to our services, as well as helping other teams recover from
incidents in their tech stacks with backups of their data (including
high visibility SEVs and incidents).

Identified performance bottlenecks in backup and restore agents running
fleet wide, and implemented fixes reducing the memory and compute
footprint of those agents running on hundreds of thousands of serves.

Lead many investigations into production issues and incidents, ensuring
they are mitigated, root-caused, and have the proper follow up actions
that are properly assigned to owners and tracked their progress until
they are resolved.

Improved investigation practices and introduced new best practices (that
were adopted by our team and other teams in the org), and continuously
improved team's monitoring dashboards and alert suite to surface issues
that were not visible enough, incorporating data points from
investigations and incidents.

Designed and implemented integration with new services and platforms at
Meta that our services depend on (e.g. storage services for backups).

Lead and participated in multiple decommissioning projects for services
that impact all team at Meta ensuring they are decommissioned
responsibly and reliably.

Mentored juniors on the team, and onboarded new team members to our
stack, practices and culture, ensuring they have all the context they
need to succeed, as well as unblocking them and helping them be
successful in their role in the team and the company.

Production Engineering at Meta combines software, systems, and infra
engineering. Production Engineers are known for their ability to work on
a wide variety of projects across multiple teams supporting the 3.7
billions users of our platforms.

**Technical Skills:** Python, Rust, Golang, Linux, MySQL, ZippyDB,
Distributed Systems, Database Infra, Thrift, Mercurial
:::

**Senior Site Reliability Engineer** Twitter London, United Kingdom May
2020 - Mar 2022

::: cvitems
Member of Twitter Database SRE team providing entire company with
Database infra, mainly MySQL clusters (both dedicated, and
multi-tenant), in addition to PostgreSQL, Vertica, and Druid clusters).

Designed and built a service that automates toil in the team. The
service resulted in a 98% drop in \"time to provision resources\", that
is more than 100k person-hours worth of savings (i.e. \>139 person
months, \>11.5 person years) in the next few years.

Monitored and improved availability, scalability, performance and
reliability of services owned by our team.

Participated in the team's oncall rotation, ensuring production issues
and incidents are uncovered and addressed properly.

Lead projects to reduce oncall noise, and authored runbooks and
documentation improving the team's incident response posture.

Mentored and onboarded new team members to the team, the tech stack, and
helped them become effective and successful members on the team.

**Technical Skills:** Python, Flask, SQLAlchemy, Linux, MySQL,
PostgreSQL, Vertica, Druid, Apache Mesos, Apache Aurora, Git
:::

**Site Reliability Engineer** GoCardless London, United Kingdom Mar
2019 - Mar 2020

::: cvitems
Protect, provide for, and progress the software and systems that make up
the GoCardless product, supporting product teams in the deployment of
high quality services.

**Technical Skills:** Golang, PostgreSQL, GCP, Kubernetes, Terraform,
Helm, Elastic Search, Kibana, Linux, Docker, Git, Prometheus, Grafana,
Thanos
:::

**Software Engineer** WeQ Global Tech GmbH Berlin - Germany Nov 2017 -
Mar 2019

::: cvitems
Developed, deployed & maintained customer facing services handling
billions of requests per day.

Created and maintained infrastructure as code for both new and legacy
systems/microservices.

Implemented autoscaling and self healing features into new services.

**Technical Skills:** PHP, Java, Spring Boot, Vert.x, Kafka, Linux,
MySQL, MongoDB, AWS, Docker, Docker Swarm, Terraform, Vagrant, Jenkins,
Prometheus, Grafana
:::

**Sr. Software & Platform Engineer - Tech Lead** Levelset (formerly
zlabs, acquired by Procore) Cairo - Egypt Mar 2013 - Oct 2017

::: cvitems
Lead the team in designing & developing an internal platform for data
verification and research process.

Lead the migration of the levelset.com platform to a microservices based
architecture, and mentored the team throughout the process.

Designed & built the API that enabled Levelset to onboard enterprise
customers by bulk importing their projects into the platform.

Worked with enterprise customers to integrate their systems with our API
and provided them with the support they needed to successfully onboard
to the platform.

Designed and built the PDF generation engine that generated
legal/financial letters for all our customers to secure their lien
rights. This is the core feature of the platform.

Designed & and lead building various growth products/features that
acquired new customer segments.

**Technical Skills:** PHP, Symfony, Linux, MySQL, Neo4j, AWS, RabbitMQ,
Apache Web Server, Soap API, Rest API, Jenkins, Git, Nagios, New Relic
:::

**Senior Software Engineer, DevOps** Mar 2013 - Oct 2017

::: cvitems
Overhauled, stabilised and scaled the MySQL backing infrastructure.

Designed the new cloud infrastructure (AWS), built automation tools and
established system monitoring, performance measurements, and fully
automated deployments

Migrated the platform from single point of failure virtual private
servers (Slicehost) to the cloud (AWS).

Worked closely with engineers and business folks to identify and solve
operational and customer issues with our services, tools and apps.

Optimised time to release by orders of magnitudes (from 2 days to an
average of 3-5 minutes), and improved uptime (99.99% from several
outages a week).

Maintained and operated Git source repositories, defining branching
strategies and tutoring the engineering teams about it.

**Technical Skills:** PHP, Symfony, Linux, MySQL, Neo4j, AWS, RabbitMQ,
Soap API, Rest API, Jenkins, Apache Web Server, Git, Nagios, New Relic
:::

**Senior Software Engineer** Handmade Studios Cairo - Egypt Jun 2012 -
Feb 2013

::: cvitems
Designed, developed & maintained an editorial website for entrepreneurs
and startups.

**Technical Skills:** PHP, Symfony, Linux, MySQL, MongoDB, AWS, Apache
Web Server, Git
:::

**Senior Software Engineer** Inmobly Cairo - Egypt Nov 2011 - May 2012

::: cvitems
Designed, developed & deployed API backends for two mobile apps that
recorded and streamed videos.

**Technical Skills:** Python, Flask, SQLAlchemy, Rest, AWS, Subversion
(svn)
:::

**Technical Consultant** Bluw i LTD Cairo - Egypt Jun 2011 - Sep 2011

::: cvitems
Implemented a social network for entrepreneurs to raise funds from angel
investors.

**Technical Skills:** PHP, Drupal, AWS, Apache Web Server, Git
:::

**Software Engineer, Tech Lead** Wuzzuf.net Cairo - Egypt Apr 2010 - Apr
2011

::: cvitems
Designed the architecture and laid out the technical vision and
guidelines for Wuzzuf.net, the leading platform in Egypt and the Middle
East.

Worked with, guided, and mentored the team in executing the technical
vision, and delivering Wuzzuf.net from scratch.

Worked closely with the CTO and CEO.

Designed, created, monitored and maintained the infrastructure of
Wuzzuf.net.

**Technical Skills:** PHP, MySQL, AWS, Apache Web Server, Mercurial,
CakePHP, Doctrine ORM, BitBucket
:::

**Senior Software Engineer** Arabia Inform Cairo - Egypt Nov 2009 - Apr
2010

::: cvitems
Designed and built an in-house media archival and indexing solution with
media encoding and advanced search capabilities and features.

Implemented and launched ads management infra and services for the
company's websites network.

Mentored other teams on infra upgrade and migration projects.

**Technical Skills:** PHP, Drupal, MySQL, Apache Web Server, OpenX, AWS,
Git
:::

**Software Engineer** Citex Software Cairo - Egypt Oct 2008 - Nov 2009

::: cvitems
Implemented a social network for entrepreneurs to raise funds from angel
investors.

**Technical Skills:** PHP, Drupal, MySQL, AWS, Git, Apache Web Server,
Nagios
:::

**PHP Developer** Media International Cairo - Egypt Jan 2007 - Sep 2009

::: cvitems
Designed, developed, deployed various PHP projects for customers and
maintained them in production ensuring their availability.

Lead various data migration projects for clients including, ensuring
safe, correct, and efficient data migration from legacy systems to the
new solutions we implemented with minimal to no downtime.

Created and maintained the \"Tech Radar\" for the org.

Designed and implemented load balancing linux for web services.

Designed and implemented MySQL architecture, including replication.

Implemented a service to centralise file and object management solution
for our services.

Designed and implemented the monitoring strategies and infra for our
services, and was heavily involved in resolving production issues, and
maintaining our services availability and uptime.

**Technical Skills:** Linux, MySQL, PHP, Drupal, Joomla, Moodle, Apache
Web Server, Nagios
:::

**PHP Developer** 20at.com Cairo - Egypt Jun 2004 - Dec 2006

::: cvitems
Designed and implemented a content management system (CMS) from scratch
to meet the demands of editorial and business requirements.

Designed and executed data migration projects from the legacy systems of
to the newly developed services with minimal downtime.

Maintained the online services and website and defined the strategies
and tooling for bug fixing and security patches.

Developed and shipped features (including whole new sub-portals) to meet
the business and editorial needs for major and current events (e.g. a
full new portals for reporting on Football World Cup 2006, Presidential
elections in Egypt, and some of the major conflicts in the area.).

**Technical Skills:** PHP, Linux, MySQL, Linux, AWS, Apache Web Server,
S/FTP
:::
:::

::: cventries
**Toggl Target**

::: cvitems
A CLI tool that helps planning weekly working hours on top of Toggl time
tracking.

Featured in Toggl's official documentation as a reference API client
implementation in python.

**Technical Skills:** Python, Requests.
:::

**Grid Status Now**

::: cvitems
A service that monitored Egypt's power grid load status, and visualised
the data in a useful way. The project exposed the data via a restful
API.

**Technical Skills:** PHP, Symfony.
:::

**Power Close**

::: cvitems
A browser addon to close tabs based on a domain name or a keyword that
is part of the URL.

**Technical Skills:** JavaScript, Firefox, Chrome.
:::

**Other Projects**

::: cvitems
Created and contributed to other projects that you can find on my
website or github profile.
:::
:::

::: cventries
Bachelors of Computer Engineering \[Dropped Out\] University of Cairo
Cairo, Egypt Fall 2003 - Summer 2007

::: cvitems
Attended a few years divided between: Architecture, then Civil
Engineering, then Computer Engineering, and a semester or two in
Commerce.

Dropped out due to personal/family circumstances and responsibilities.
:::
:::

::: cvskills
English Professional proficiency

Arabic Native proficiency
:::
